Developmental Milestones: 4 to 5 Year Olds
Two children are playing on a swing set, laughing joyfully in a sunny park. One girl swings while the other runs beside her.
​​Before you know it, the somewhat calm 3-year-old becomes a dynamo of energy, drive and more out-of-bounds behavior. At the same time, their mind is a font of imaginative ideas. The "monsters" they talk with at school or the "dragon" who helps them across the street are normal tall tales for 4- to 5-year-olds. All of this behavior and thinking will help your child build a secure foundation as they approach kindergarten.

Here are some other milestones you can look for.

Movement milestones
Stands on one foot for 10 seconds or longer

Climbs stairs alternating feet without support

Hops, somersaults

Swings, climbs

May be able to hop on one foot

Milestones in hand and finger skills
Copies triangle and other geometric patterns

Draws person with at least three body parts

Prints some letters

Dresses and undresses without assistance

Unbuttons and buttons medium-size buttons

Uses fork and spoon

Usually cares for own toilet needs

Language milestones
Recalls part of a story

Uses four-word sentences

Uses words that are 100% understandable by strangers

Uses future tense

Tells longer stories

Says name and address

Cognitive milestones
Can count 10 or more objects

Correctly names at least four colors

Better understands the concept of time

Knows about things used every day in the home (money, food, appliances)

Social milestones
Wants to please friends

Wants to be like her friends

More likely to agree to rules

Dresses and undresses without much help

Engages in well-developed imaginative play

Brushes teeth

Shows more independence and may even visit a next-door neighbor by self

Developmental health watch
Because each child develops in her own particular manner, it's impossible to predict exactly when or how your own preschooler will perfect a given skill.

The developmental milestones listed here will give you a general idea of the changes you can expect as your child gets older. Don't be alarmed if their development takes a slightly different course. Talk with your pediatrician, however, if your child displays any of the following signs of possible developmental delay for this age range.

Shows extremely fearful or timid behavior

Shows extremely aggressive behavior

Is unable to separate from parents without major protest

Is easily distracted and unable to concentrate on any single activity for more than five minutes

Shows little interest in playing with other children

Refuses to respond to people in general, or responds only superficially

Rarely uses fantasy or imitation in play

Seems unhappy or sad much of the time

Doesn't engage in a variety of activities

Avoids or seems aloof with other children and adults

Doesn't express a wide range of emotions

Has trouble eating, sleeping, or using the toilet

Can't differentiate between fantasy and reality

Seems unusually passive

Cannot understand two-part commands using prepositions ("Put the cup on the table," for example, or "Get the ball under the couch.")

Can't correctly give their first and last name

Doesn't use plurals or past tense properly when speaking

Doesn't talk about their daily activities and experiences

Cannot build a tower of six to eight blocks

Seems uncomfortable holding a crayon

Has trouble taking off their clothing

Cannot wash and dry their hands