Is Your Child Ready to Read?
Click here to insert a picture from SharePoint.
Is your child interested in learning the names of letters? Do they look through books and magazines on their own? Do they like to "write" with a pencil or pen? Do they listen attentively during story time?

If the answer is yes, they may be ready to learn some of the basics of reading. If not, they are like most preschoolers. They'll will likely take another year or two to develop the language skills, visual perception and memory needed to begin formal reading.

Should my 4-year-old be reading?
Although a few 4-year-olds really want to learn to read and will begin to recognize certain familiar words, there's no need to push your child. Even if you succeed in giving them a head start, it may or may not help them much once school begins. Some early readers lose their advantage over other children during the second or third grade, when the other students gain the same basic skills.

Make reading fun, not forced
The most crucial factor determining a student's success in school is a child's enthusiasm for learning, not how strongly they were pushed early on. Make learning to read fun, not forced. Encouraging your child's enthusiasm in learning is more important than the age at which a child actually learns to read.

What's the most successful approach to early learning? Let your child set their own pace and enjoy the journey. Don't drill them on letters, numbers, colors, shapes or words. Instead, encourage their curiosity and desire to explore on their own. Read them books they enjoy, but don't push them to learn the words. Provide them with educational experiences, but make sure they're also entertaining.

When your child is ready to learn letters
When your child is ready to learn letters and reading, there are plenty of valuable tools to help—educational television programs, games, songs and even some educational media. But don't expect them to do the job alone. You need to be involved, too.

If they're watching an educational TV show, for example, sit with them and talk about the concepts shown. If they're playing a computer program, do it with them to ensure it's appropriate for their abilities. If the game is too frustrating, it may dampen their enthusiasm and defeat the purpose. Remember that active learning in a warm,