Children's Mental Health: Shifting Focus From What's Wrong to What's Strong
A woman and a boy share a joyful moment, smiling at each other while holding hands in a bright, cozy room.
By: Evelyn Berger-Jenkins, MD, MPH, FAAP

When parents hear "mental health," they often think about stress, anxiety, depression, ADHD and other emotional challenges their child may face. And it's true that more children and teens than ever are dealing with these kinds of struggles. But mental and emotional health isn't only important to focus on when something feels wrong.

Taking a broader approach to children's mental health: AAP policy explained
New guidance from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) encourages a broader approach to childhood mental health. Beyond signs of struggle, this approach centers on building strengths over time, preventing mental health challenges as much as possible and identifying and managing problems early and with tools that might be found in everyday life.
How children learn to manage emotions & build resilience
Mental and emotional development is a normal, ongoing part of growing up—just like physical growth. It begins in infancy, progresses through childhood and adolescence, and is shaped by relationships, experiences and the world around your child.

By focusing more on what helps children feel safe, connected and confident, parents and pediatricians can help kids develop skills to help handle stress, manage emotions and build resilience. With trusted relationships, ongoing conversations and support built into everyday care, families and pediatricians can nurture healthy mental and emotional development, long before problems arise, and whenever challenges appear.

Healthy mental and emotional development is a gradual process that begins at birth and continues as kids build the mental, emotional and social skills they need to thrive in the world.
If you've ever watched a little one learn to walk, you know it doesn't happen overnight. Toddlers trip, stumble, fall and get up again and again before they master the skill.

Healthy mental development follows a similar track. A child's surroundings spark thoughts, feelings and eventually, words, reactions and behaviors. Young brains develop quickly, fueled by the daily workout of learning new things and relating to others.

Healthy mental & emotional development helps your child learn to:
Think clearly and make good choices

Feel safe at home and confident in new spaces

Follow their curiosity and enjoy learning

Manage strong emotions in safe ways

Develop confidence in themselves and acceptance for differences

Show empathy and respect for others

Speak up and seek help when they're scared, sick, hurt or threatened

A more active approach to your child's mental & emotional development
Seeing mental health as one essential part of your child's growth can change the conversations you have with pediatricians, teachers, coaches, day care providers and others who support your family.

This way of thinking is part of a growing emphasisis on prevention in health care. It puts mental health on an equal footing with physical health. This tracks with decades of research that show the mind and body are one interconnected system, and caring for them together helps people thrive. In fact, many health care advocates want to reshape our health care system to keep kids and adults healthy, not simply treat them when they're sick or hurt.

Does emphasizing mental wellness mean we focus less on kids who get sick?
Building a child's mental resilience does NOT mean overlooking clear signs that they may need mental health treatment. Every child is unique, and many face mental health risks that threaten their mental balance from the start.

For example, millions of kids have experienced serious trauma. Others have a family history of mental health problems based on genetics and inherited risks. Still others face discrimination based on race, gender, sexual orientation, body type and other factors that threaten mental wellness. These are just some of the causes that can trigger mental health struggles, even when families have done everything possible to nurture a child's strengths.

Seeking help early is the key to helping your child move forward. Young brains learn coping skills easily, allowing kids to adapt readily. With the right care and support, children and teens have the best possible chance for mental wellness that lasts a lifetime.
Nurturing your child's mental & emotional well-being: tips for parents
Focus on these fundamentals to help your child develop a strong, healthy mind that supports physical health, too.

Acknowledge and accept that every child is different and unique. Some are more reserved and shy, while others are outgoing and expressive. These ingrown traits should be celebrated—in fact, they are all quite helpful in different situations. Rather than trying to change your child's emotional or behavioral style, acknowledge, celebrate and work with it so that they will feel confident about who they are and learn how to use their strengths for good.

Trust and understanding. Kids need to feel safe sharing their thoughts and experiences with you. Knowing you will listen without shaming, blaming or judging shows that you're in their corner, no matter what. The closeness and trust you build will allow them to come to you when things get serious – or simply when they need to be heard. This sends the message that, in difficult times, we're always stronger together.

Sleep. Growing bodies and brains need lots of rest! Here's a refresher on sleep routines for babies and guidance on how many hours older kids need, based on their age and stage of development. (Also see "Sleep and Health: Why Rest Matters for Your Whole Family.") Explain to teenagers why sleep is important for their mind and body to work well, rather than getting frustrated or using punishments.

Nutrition. Fresh, healthy food helps kids build strength from the inside out. Teaching kids how to eat well can help them fight disease, handle stress and fuel active play, sports and other healthy physical activities. Teach healthy nutrition by having healthy foods in the house as much as possible and modeling these behaviors.

Shared meals. Eating together gives your child a sense of closeness and belonging. Hearing about their experiences at the family table keeps you in touch with their daily lives. It's also a great opportunity to model and practice conversation skills.

Movement. Families who walk, bike, enjoy sports and active play also enjoy better sleep. Daily movement also keeps routine stress from harming a child's health while strengthening their ability to cope with whatever comes next.

Healthy media use. Tech is here to stay, but families need to use it mindfully. Creating a family media plan that sets expectations and rules around devices, content, safety, privacy, kindness and more is an essential step.

Clear routines. When daily life has a predictable rhythm, kids feel centered and secure. Healthy routines carve out time for self-care, from bathing and brushing teeth to relaxing before bed. (Letting your routines flex when you're moving, traveling or recovering from an illness or injury can be healthy too.)

Find more tips in this article.


Making your child's doctor your family wellness partner
Visiting your pediatrician or family doctor regularly gives them the chance to track your child's progress. Docs who work with kids are trained to look beyond narrow ideas of what's normal or not. They see your child's health in light of their age and stage of development. They also take into account your family's health history, habits, culture, beliefs and more when offering advice or treatment.

The AAP encourages all pediatricians and health teams to build mental wellness into every office visit. Your child's doctor will look for signs of healthy mental development, asking questions about school, friendships, daily habits and other factors. AAP guidance for childhood health care stresses the need for an equitable, bias-free approach that sees the whole child and family.

Community and cultural understanding can help your child thrive
Every child grows up in a unique social space. Different communities view mental health in different ways based on history, experience, family struggles, beliefs and cultural forces.

Seeking out a doctor who understands your child's world is one step in supporting healthy mental development. Finding resources, or helping build them where they're missing, will benefit your child and possibly many others. Look for programs, playgrounds, open spaces and conversation groups where other families share your commitment to good health, both mental and physical. No matter what happens in our world, you and your child will find strength in community.